---
layout: default
title: "Notes On: Python"
categories: blog notes-on
---

## Installation
Head to [the official Python website](http://www.python.org/download/) and download the relevant installation package for your system.
There are usually two production versions available. Either is fine.

## Core structure

Commands can be written and executed in the Python interpretor, or placed in a program file with the file extension of `.py`. Double-clicking on the Python file will then run it. Generally, lines starting with, and immediately following, `>>>` are written in the interpretor.

First key point to remember is that Python does not need semi-colons at the end of expressions, and that whitespace is very important! Be sure to indent text when required, especially in statements and functions.

### Comments
Start single line comments with the hash key `#`. For multi-line comments use three consecutive double quotes, i.e.

<pre><code class="language-python">""" This is a
multi-line comment """
</code></pre>

### Numbers and Maths
Numbers (integers or floats) behave similar to other programming languages, though take care with integer division. For example,

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> 12/3
4                   // Correct
>>> 13/3
4                   // Incorrect
>>> 13.0/3.0
4.333333333333333   // Correct    or    13.0/3    or    13/3.0    or    13/3.
</code></pre>

Mathematical operators are the usual `+ - * / %`, with `**` to denote the exponential operator, such as

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> 2 ** 3
8
</code></pre>

### Variables
Python variables are loosely-typed and case-sensitive. Be sure to capitalize the first letter of your booleans.

### Strings
Use the `+` key to concatenate strings, or string literals. The `print` command prints strings:

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> print "This is a string"
This is a string
>>> print "This is the number " + str(10)  # Concatenate a string and a number with the str() function
This is the number 10
>>> print "This is the number " + `10`     # Use backticks instead of the str() function
This is the number 10
</code></pre>

The `str()` function performs _explicit string conversion_, so _explicitly_ converts anything that isn't a string, into a string. _Implicit_ string conversion is literally putting quotes around a sequence of characters.

Another function is `len()` which returns the length of a sequence of characters. Other basic string-specific methods are `.upper()`, `.lower()`, noting that these use dot notation.

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> a = "Hello"
>>> b = "World"
>>> len(a)
5
>>> a + b
"HelloWorld"
>>> a.upper()
"HELLO"
>>> a.startswith("Hell")
True
>>> a.replace("H","M")
"Mello"
</code></pre>

Remember that strings in Python are _immutable_ meaning that you cannot change them once they have been created. Strings can be formatted with `%` via the following syntax

<pre><code class="language-python">print "%s" % (variable)
</code></pre>

where `s` represents a string. For example,

<pre><code class="language-python">print "My name is: %s, and likes %s" % (name, likes)
</code></pre>

where `name` and `like` are variables of string type.

### Conversions

Methods exist to convert variables between datatypes, e.g. `int()`, `float()`, and `str()`.

### Raw Input
To ask for user input use the following commands:

<pre><code class="language-python">first_input  = input("Your name please:")                 # Just for strings
second_input = raw_input("Give me something, anything:")  # Any data type is accepted
</code></pre>

### Control Flow
Syntax for conditional statements are

<pre><code class="language-python">if condition1:
    # Do something
elif condition2:
    # Do something else
else:
    # Do another thing if condition1 and condition2 both fail
</code></pre>

_Note: Remember the colons!_

There are six comparators: `==`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, and `>=`.

### Loops

There are two kep looping constructs

A while loop:

<pre><code class="language-python">n = 10
while n > 10:
    print 'T-minus', n
    n = n - 1
print 'Blastoff!'
</code></pre>

and a for loop:

<pre><code class="language-python">for i in range(5):
    print i

names = ['Dave','Paula','Thomas','Lewis']
for name in names:
    print name
</code></pre>

### Printing

To print to stdout, we use the `print` command (Python 2)

<pre><code class="language-python">print x
print x, y, z
print "Your name is", name
print x,                         # Omits newline
</code></pre>

or the print function (Python 3)

<pre><code class="language-python">print(x)
print(x,y,z)
print("Your name is", name)
print(x,end=' ')                 # Omits newline
</code></pre>

### Files

Opening a file

<pre><code class="language-python">f = open("foo.txt","r")          # Open for reading
f = open("bar.txt","w")          # Open for writing
</code></pre>

To read data

<pre><code class="language-python">data = f.read()                  # Read all data
</code></pre>

To write text to a file

<pre><code class="language-python">g.write("some text\n")
</code></pre>

Reading a file one line at a time

<pre><code class="language-python">f = open("foo.txt","r")
for line in f:
    # Process the line
    ...
f.close()
</code></pre>

### Functions
Generally, there are three parts to a function in Python

<pre><code class="language-python"># This multi-line comment
# is entirely optional, but describes
# what the function does
def name_of_function():           # This is the Header
    # Do something                # This is the Body
</code></pre>

To call the function, just type `name_of_function()`. Parameters may be placed, as a comma separated list, in the parentheses.

Use _splat arguments_ if you do not know how many arguments a function will take:

<pre><code class="language-python">def many_arguments(*args):
    # Do something

many_arguments("arg1", "arg2", "arg3")
</code></pre>

To specific an optional argument, or provide a default value for a parameter, define it in the function header:

<pre><code class="language-python">def function_name(req_arg,opt_arg="optional"):
    # Do something
</code></pre>

### Data Structures

#### Tuples

A tuple is a read-only collection of related values grouped together

<pre><code class="language-python">tuple = ('123', 456, 789)
</code></pre>

You can then unpack the tuple in variables

<pre><code class="language-python">a, b, c = tuple
    # a = '123'
    # b = 456
    # c = 789
</code></pre>

#### Dictionaries

A dictionary is a collection of values indexed by 'keys'

<pre><code class="language-python">dict = {
    'alpha' = '123',
    'beta'  = 456,
    'gamma' = 789
}

>>> dict['alpha']
'123'
>>> dict['beta'] = 1011
</code></pre>

#### Lists

A list is an ordered sequence of items (usually of the same type. Python does not care, but we do not normally do this.)

<pre><code class="language-python">names = ['Dave', 'Paula', 'Thomas']

>>> len(names)
3
>>> names.append('Lewis')
>>> names
['Dave', 'Paula', 'Thomas', 'Lewis']
>>> names[0]
'Dave'
</code></pre>

We can create a new list by applying an operation to each element of a sequence. This is called _list comprehensions_

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> a = [1,2,3,4,5]
>>> b = [2*x for x in a]
>>> b
[2,4,6,8,10]
</code></pre>

#### Sets

A set is an unordered collection of unique items, useful for detecting duplicates or related tasks.

<pre><code class="language-python">ids = set(['123','456','789'])

>>> ids.add('101')
>>> ids.remove('123')
>>> '456' in ids
True
</code></pre>

### Modules
A module is a file that contains definitions — including variables and functions — that you can use. You can import modules by using the `import` command, such as for `math` library

#### Math

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> import math
</code></pre>

and call a function such as `math.sqrt()`, where the `math.` prefix tells python to look for the function `sqrt()` in the `math` module.

Note that in your program, you can assign a custom name to a function. For example,

<pre><code class="language-python">>>> mysqrt = math.sqrt
>>> mysqrt(9)               # Use new custom name for function
3.0
</code></pre>

You can also just get a single function from a module by _function import_ such as just the `sqrt` function

<pre><code class="language-python">from math import sqrt
</code></pre>

You can then call the function by `sqrt()`, noting that we do not need the `math.` prefix.

To import everything from a module use an asterisk

<pre><code class="language-python">from math import *
</code></pre>

but be careful with this. You have been warned.

#### URLs

To read data from the web, we can import the `urllib` module.

<pre><code class="language-python">import urllib                # urllib.request on Python 3

u = urllib.urlopen("http://www.python.org")
data = u.read()
</code></pre>

### Parsing XML

Parsing a document into a tree

<pre><code class="language-python">from xml.etree.ElementTree import parse

doc = parse('data.xml')
</code></pre>

Useful methods include `findall('elname')`, `findtext('elname')`

<!-- ## Web Development
packages, frameworks, how to build web application with python, tools required, best practices, -->

<!-- ## Computer Science
web crawling, data structures -->

<!-- ## Notes -->

## Tips & Tricks

- Use the `-i` flag to enter an interactive session after running a Pythoon script file. Useful when debugging. i.e. `python -i helloworld.py`
- Counter objects for simplified tabulation

<pre><code class="language-python">from collections import Counter

words = ['yes','but','no','but','yes']
wordcounts = Counter(words)

>>> wordcounts['yes']
2
>>> wordcounts.most_common()
[('yes',2),('but',2),('no',1)]
</code></pre>

- Advanced sorting with key-functions. Lambdas, essentially, create small inline functions; the result of key-function determines sort order

<pre><code class="language-python">records.sort(key=lambda p: p['COMPLETION DATA'])
records.sort(ley=lambda p: p['ZIP'])
</code></pre>

- Key-functions can also be used to iterate over groups of sorted data

<pre><code class="language-python">records.sort(key=lambda r: r['ZIP'])

from itertools import groupby
groups = groupby(records, key=lambda r: r['ZIP'])
for zipcode, group in groups:
    for r in group:
        # All records with same zip-code
        ...
</code></pre>

- Building indices to data, which builds a dictionary

<pre><code class="language-python">from collections import defaultdict

zip_index = defaultdict(list)
for r in records:
    zip_index[r['ZIP']].append(r)

zip_index = {
    '60640': [ rec, rec, ... ],
    '60637': [ rec, rec, rec, ... ],
    ...
}
</code></pre>

- There are a lot of third-party libraries which provide many out-of-the-box functionality. e.g.

    - numpy/scipy (array processing)
    - matplotlib (plotting)
    - pandas (statistics, data analysis)
    - requests (interacting with APIs)
    - ipython (better interactive shell)

## Bibliography & Resources

- [The official Python documentation](http://docs.python.org/)
- [The New Boston](http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLEA1FEF17E1E5C0DA) video tutorials
- [Interactive server-side Python shell](http://shell.appspot.com/) for Google App Engine
- [CodeAcademy](http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/python) interactive Python course
- [Learn Python Through Public Data Hacking](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RrPZza_vZ3w)
