---
layout: default
title: "Notes On: C"
categories: blog notes-on
---

### Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

* Table of Contents
{:toc}

---

## Setup
We will be using the `gcc` compiler throughout.

## Basics

### Starting up
The most basic code-base for a program written in C is shown below, with annotations:

<pre><code class="language-c">#include <stdio.h>           // Preprocessor Directives and Declarations

int main() {                 // Initiation function
    printf("Hello World!");  // Function body
    return 0;
}
</code></pre>

To compile and run the program, use the following commands in a terminal

<pre><code class="language-bash">> gcc hello.c -o hello
> ./hello
</code></pre>

Here is a quick run-down of the syntax:

- Variables are strictly-typed, meaning you must specify the type of the variable.
- So are functions.
- Semi-colons are required at the end of each statement.
- You will probably want to include the `stdio.h` header file in all your programs.
- Comments are declared with `//` for single-line, and `/* ... */` for multi-line.
- Every function must return something (?) and must be of the same type as what you declared.
- Variables and functions are case-sensitive.

### Variables
The standard types of variables are what you should expect, listed below, except there is no `string` variable type.

- `char` - a Character
- `int` - an Integer (up to &plusmn; 32767 on a 32-bit system)
- `long int` - a larger Integer (up to &plusmn; 2147483647)
- `float` - a Floating Point Number
- `double` - a Floating Point Number with greater precision

To declare a variable, we use the following syntax

<pre><code class="language-c">int i;      // Single variable declaration
int i,j,k;  // Multiple variables separated with a comma
int i = 0;  // Assign a value when declaring the variable
</code></pre>

For strings, we use a character array whose length is one more than te length of the word. This takes into account the newline at the end of the string.

<pre><code class="language-c">#include <stdio.h>

char string[10] = "a string";
</code></pre>

Variables declared outside any functions are called _global variables_ and can be accessed by any function in the program. Variables declared inside a function are called _local variables_ and are destroyed once the function exits. A _static variable_ is a local variable but it's value is preserved on exit of a function, and is available for use when the function is next called.

<pre><code class="language-c">static int name_of_static_var;
</code></pre>

_Constant variables_ are declared in a similar way

<pre><code class="language-c">const float pi = 3.1415926;
</code></pre>

Alternatively, you can use the C-proprocessor directive `#define`:

<pre><code class="language-c">#define pi 3.1415926
</code></pre>

### Input & Output
Some standard library functions require a conversion specification for different types of variables.

<pre><code class="language-c">%d  // int
%f  // float or double
%e  // float or double (in scientific notation)
%c  // character
%s  // character string
</code></pre>

One function which uses these is `printf`

<pre><code class="language-c">#include <stdio.h>

char str[] = "a string";

int main() {
    printf("This is %s",str);
    return 0;
}
</code></pre>

Special characters can also be used, such as `\t` and `\n`, to indicate a tab or newline, respectively.

For integers, floats and doubles you can format the output.

<pre><code class="language-c">int x = 5;
printf("%10.4d",x);  // prints out 0005
</code></pre>

The `.` allows for precision. The number `10` puts `0005` over 10 spaces so that the number `5` is on the tenth spacing.

To capture input, from a keyboard for example, we use the `fgets(str,sizeof(str),stdin)` function, which takes three parameters: `str` is a character array, `sizeof(str)` is the maximum number of characters to be read (plus one for the newline), and `stdin` the source of the input (keyboard).

`fgets()` returns the whole string. To remove the newline character use

<pre><code class="language-c">str[strlen(str)-1] = "\0";  // Set last character to `null`
</code></pre>

To convert the text read in via `fgets()` we use the function `sscanf(line,"%d %d %d",&num1,&num2,&num3)`, where `line` is the input from `fgets()`, and `&num1`, `&num2`, `&num3` are points to already initiated integers.

To read input from a file, rather than a keyboard, just provide the filename in `fgets()`

<pre><code class="language-c">#include <stdio.h>

const char FILE_NAME[] = "inputdata.dat";
      char line[100];
      int  num1, num2, num3;

int main() {
    FILE *in_file;                                              // Indicate you want a file
    in_file = fopen(FILE_NAME,"r");                             // Open the file

    fgets(line,sizeof(line),in_file);                           // Get input
    sscanf(line,"%d %d %d",&num1,&num2,&num3);                  // Convert to numbers
    printf("You inputted numbers: %d %d %d\n",num1,num2,num3);  // Print out input

    return 0;
}
</code></pre>

### Strings
There are several string specific functions which are good to know:

<pre><code class="language-c">strcopy(new_str,str);  // Copies the string `str` to `new_str`
strcat(new_str,str);   // Adds the string `str to `new_str`
strlen(str);           // Returns the length of the string `str`
</code></pre>

### Operators
The usual mathematical operators are present: `+`, `-`, `/`, `*`, `%`. Note (expecially when using division) that if both operands are integers, then the output will be an integer.

The comparision operators are `==`, `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`, which return `0` or `1`. Note that when comparing two real numbers it is usually better to use a tolerance:

<pre><code class="language-c">same = (abs(a-b) < tol);
</code></pre>

Boolean operators are `&&`, `||`, `!`.

It is often useful to know the order of precedence when using many operators in one statement.

<pre><code class="language-text">high    parentheses         ()
        unary               !, ++, --
        multiplication      *, /, %
        addition            +, -
        comparision         ==, !=, <, >, <=, >=
        and                 &&
        or                  ||
low     assignment          +=, -=, *=, /=, %=
</code></pre>

### Conditionals
_Statement block_ are groups of code within a single set of curly braces `{ }`.

_Conditional blocks_ are similar to other programming languages:

<pre><code class="language-c">if( statement1 ) {
    // Do something
} else if( statement 2 ) {
    // Do something else
} else {
    // Do another thing
}
</code></pre>

### Loops
The usual loops are present:

<pre><code class="language-c">while( statement ) {          // While loop
    // Do something
}

do {                          // Do-While loop
    // Something
} while( statement )

for(inits; tests; actions) {  // For loop
    // Do something
}
</code></pre>

The keywords `break` and `continue` can be used in loops.

### Arrays
Just like a character array, we can have arrays which hold other types of variables, such as an integer array: `int int_arr[]`. Arrays are zero-index-based. Be careful not to address array elements outside of the declared array, as this will result in errors. Writing to an index outside of the declared array means writing to a random memory slot, and may cause weird things to happen!

Multi-dimensional arrays are declared such as `int mul_arr[][]`. Since memory is linearly addressable, matrices in C are stored in _row-major order_.

### Functions
All functions must be declared, known as a function prototype, before the `main()` function. The general syntax is as follows

<pre><code class="language-c">return_type function_name( arg1_type arg1, arg2_type arg2, ... , argn_type argn );
</code></pre>

The `return_type` of a function is the variable type that the function returns. If a function doesn't return anything, set `return_type` to `void`.

<pre><code class="language-c">#import <stdio.h>

int product(int a, int b);

int main() {
    int a = 2;
    int b = 3;

    printf("The product of %d and %d is %d\n", a, b, product(a,b));
    return 0;
}

int product(int a, int b) {
    return a * b;
}
</code></pre>

### Pointers
Variables can be accessed, as before, by name. When variables are passed to functions as such, in fact, only its value is passed through as a local variable. Any changes made to an argument will not affect the original variable. If you wish to change the original variable by a function, you will need to pass through a variable _pointer_.

Pointers are objects that _points_ to a memory address of another object. Pointers must be declared (since they are variables that store memory addresses).

<pre><code class="language-c">int *point;
</code></pre>

To recall the memory address of a variable, we use the _ampersand operator_.

<pre><code class="language-c">int an_integer;
int *point;

an_integer = 10;
point      = &an_integer;
</code></pre>

To get the content of a memory address given by a pointer, we use an asterisk.

<pre><code class="language-c">*point;  // 10
</code></pre>

The name of an array is the same as a pointer to that array. So `*array` is the same as `array[0]`, and `*(array+1)` is the same as `array[1]`, etc.

Pointers allows us to allocate memory for a program at runtime, rather than compile time - this is called _dynamic memory allocation_. `malloc` stands for _memory allocation_ and is a standard library function. It's prototype is

<pre><code class="language-c">void *malloc(size_t nbytes);
</code></pre>

`malloc` returns a generic pointer, a pointer which points to any type of object. When `malloc` runs out of memory space, it returns a _null pointer_. Hence, we need to check for this condition at each `malloc` call.

`calloc` and `realloc` are other dynamic memory allocation functions.

It is best to free up the memory. To do so, use the `free` function, and then set the relevant pointer to `NULL`.

<pre><code class="language-c">#import <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char *array_pointer;
    array_pointer = malloc(5 * sizeof(int));  // Array of 5 integers

    if( array_pointer == NULL ) {
        fprintf(stderr, "Out of memory\n");
        exit(8);
    }

    free(array_pointer);
    array_pointer = NULL;
}
</code></pre>

### Structures
Structures allow you to organise related objects. These can be variables or functions, etc. The definition of a structure should be at the top of the program.

<pre><code class="language-c">struct a_structure {                       // Define structure
    char a_string[];
    int  an_integer;
    int  another_integer;
}

...

struct a_structure structure_name;         // Declare a new variable

structure_name.a_string        = "hello";  // Assign values with dot-notation
structure_name.an_integer      = 5;
structure_name.another_integer = 10;
</code></pre>

When passing a structure to a function, we usually pass a pointer to the structure, and use the arrow symbol `->` to access the contents of a pointer.

<pre><code class="language-c">char   str[];
struct a_structure *point;  // Declare pointer of variable type `a_structure`

point = &structure_name;    // Point to `structure_name`
str   = point->a_string;
</code></pre>

### Libraries
As well as the standard input/output library, we have others. Most often, you will want to use mathematical functions. These are included in the math library.

<pre><code class="language-c">#import <math.h>
</code></pre>

To compile a program, we now need to use the `-lm` parameter so that the compiler knows to look for the `libm.*.so` library in the directory `/lib/`.

<pre><code class="language-c">gcc program.c -lm -0 program
</code></pre>

## Resources

- [CY900 - Foundations of Scientific Computing](http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/csc/teaching/modules/cy900/current/)
- [C Basics](http://www.physics.drexel.edu/courses/Comp_Phys/General/C_basics/)
- [Pointers](http://www.lemoda.net/c/boredzo-pointers/pointers.html)
