---
layout: default 
title: "GeoJSON"
categories: blog
---

[GeoJSON](http://geojson.org/) is an [open standard](http://geojson.org/geojson-spec.html) 
for describing geographical features. It supports the following data types:

* `Point`: an array of coordinates describing a single position.
* `LineString`: an array of two or more positions.
* `Polygon`: an array of `LinearRing` coordinate arrays.
* `Multipoint`: an array of positions.
* `MultiLineString`: an array of LineStrings.
* `MultiPolygon`: an array of Polygon coordinate arrays.

A `LinearRing` is a closed `LineString` with four or more positions where the first and last
positions are equivalent.

Geometries can be grouped together within a `GeometryCollection` object. Geometries with additional
information are called `Features`. A group of `Features` is called a `FeatureCollection`.

The basic structure of a GeoJSON object is thus

    {
        "type": "FeatureCollection",
        "features": [{
            "type": "Feature",
            "geometry": {
                "type": "Point",
                "coordinates": "[0.0, 0.0]"
            },
            "properties": {
                "prop0": "value0",
                "prop1": "value1"
            }
        }]
    }

A GeoJSON object may also have the following attributes:

* `csr`: Coordinate Reference System. The default CRS uses the WGS84 datum, with longitude and 
   latitude units of decimal degrees. The CRS should only be described in the top-most level 
   of a GeoJSON  object, and may not be overridden by children objects, i.e. all coordinates 
   within a single GeoJSON object must be consistent. Note that CRS 
   [may be removed](http://sgillies.net/blog/2014/08/06/pruning-crs-from-geojson.html)
   from the GeoJSON specification.
* `bbox`: Bounding Box. Describes information on the coordinate range of a GeoJSON object.
   It has 2^N values, where N is the dimension of the coordinate system.

## TopoJSON

[TopoJSON](https://github.com/topojson/topojson-specification) is a topological geospatial 
data interchange format based on GeoJSON. A TopoJSON topology represents one or more 
geometries that share sequences of positions called arcs. It supports the same geometry 
types as GeoJSON and may contain additional information describing non-geographical data. 
For example,

    {
        "type": "Topology",
        "objects": {
            "example": {
                "type": "GeometryCollection",
                "geometries": [{
                    "type": "Point",
                    "coordinates": "[0.0, 0.0]",
                    "properties": {
                        "prop0": "value0",
                        "prop1": "value1"
                    }
                }]
            }
        },
        "arcs": [
            [[102, 0], [103, 1], [104, 0], [105, 1]],
            [[100, 0], [101, 0], [101, 1], [100, 1], [100, 0]]
        ]
    }

TopoJSON consists of a single topology object, with multiple named geometry objects. It must 
have an `arcs` attribute whose value is an array of arcs, and may have `transform` and/or 
`bbox` attributes. The `transform` attribute allows for more efficient serialisation by 
representing positions as integers rather than floats.

To transform from a quantized position to an absolute position:

* Multiply each quantized position element by the corresponding scale element.
* Add the corresponding translate element.

## GeoJSON and Python

[This walkthrough](http://www.macwright.org/2012/10/31/gis-with-python-shapely-fiona.html) of 
two popular python libraries for GIS gives a good overview of what data formats are supported; 
from Shapefiles to GeoJSON. Shapely does manipulating and analysing data, whereas Fiona 
performs reading and writing of data formats. Since Shapely is based on 
[GEOS](http://trac.osgeo.org/geos/), it is efficient and supports many operations.

Other python libraries:

* [geojson 1.0](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/geojson/1.0)
* [PyGeoj](https://thepythongischallenge.wordpress.com/2014/07/25/pygeoj-a-simple-python-geojson-file-reader-and-writer/)

There is even a GeoJSON [MIME type](http://sgillies.net/blog/2014/05/22/the-geojson-media-type.html)
available!

## GeoJSON and Protocol Buffers

[MapBox](https://www.mapbox.com/) are actively developing [Geobuf](https://github.com/mapbox/geobuf) 
which defines a `.proto` file describing TopoJSON and GeoJSON objects. Their read-me provides some 
benchmarks. Interesting discussions are available in their [issue tracker](https://github.com/mapbox/geobuf/issues).
Note that the Geobuf encoding schema is not yet stable.

An alternative source of inspiration is the [PBF Format](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/PBF_Format)
from OpenStreetMap.

Granted, if one only wanted to support basic GeoJSON data, the interface may be 
simplified. For example,

    package geojson;

    message FeatureCollection {
        repeated Feature features = 2;
    }

    message Feature {
        required Geometry geometry = 2;
        optional string properties = 3;

        optional string id = 4;
    }

    message GeometryCollection {
        repeated Geometry geometries = 2;
    }

    message Geometry {
        required GeometryType type = 2;
        repeated double coordinates = 4;
    }

    enum GeometryType {
        POINT = 0;
        MULTIPOINT = 1;
        LINESTRING = 2;
        MULTILINESTRING = 3;
        POLYGON = 4;
        MULTIPOLYGON = 5;
        GEOMETRYCOLLECTION = 6;
    }

Further optimisations can (and probably should) be made, such as:

* not JSON serializing the `properties` object and opting to encode using 
  the `Value` message as in Mapbox's implementation. Serializing to a string
  keeps the interface inuitive, but does not provide the best encoding possible.
* the `id` in the `Feature` message could also be stored as a
  `sint64` if the ID is itself an integer (which is common). Then, better
  compression can be acheived.
* the use of a `Header` message to store `dimension`, `precision` and `transform`
  data. This means coordinates can be stored as integers for better compression.
